docs: write a release article in the blog (#128)
image-js/image-js-docs: blog/release.md

---
slug: Release of a new version
title: Release Notes
date: 2025-07-19
---

We're excited to announce the release of image-js-typescript, a complete rewrite of the popular image-js library. This new version brings TypeScript support and a more intuitive API while maintaining the powerful image processing capabilities you love.

<!--- truncate --->

# API Changes

## ⚠️ Breaking changes

### Changed the way images are loaded and created

Static method `load` for reading and method `save` for writing images have been replaced with dedicated functions `read` and `write`.

```ts
//Before
import { Image } from 'image-js';
const img = await Image.load('cat.jpg');
img.save('newCat.jpg');
```

```ts
//After
import { read, write } from 'image-js';
const img2 = await read('cat.jpg');
await write('newCat.jpg', img);
```

There are also synchronous versions of these functions.(add more explanation)

```ts
import { readSync, writeSync } from 'image-js';
const img = readSync('cat.jpg');
writeSync('newCat.jpg', img);
```

> The new approach allows for better TypeScript inference, smaller bundle sizes through tree-shaking, and clearer API design where I/O operations are separate from image manipulation.

Reviewer: The new intro SGTM.

---

> slug: Release of a new version
> title: Release Notes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
slug: v1-release
title: Release notes v1
```

**Drawing methods**:

`img.paintPolyline()` ➡️ `img.drawPolyline()`

`img.paintPolygon()` ➡️ `img.drawPolygon()`

`img.paintCircle()` ➡️ `img.drawCircle()`

**Other methods**:

`img.copy()` ➡️ `img.clone()`

`img.clearBit()` ➡️ `img.setBit()`

`img.getLocalMaxima()` ➡️ `img.getExtrema()`

`img.getChannel()` ➡️ `img.extractChannel()`

`img.rotateLeft()` and `img.rotateRight()` ➡️ `img.rotate()`

`img.flipX()` and `img.flipY()` ➡️ `img.flip()`

Consistent naming follows common conventions ("draw\*" for rendering, "clone" for copying objects).

### Compatibility requirements

- Node.js: 18+ (previously 14+)
- TypeScript: 5.2.2+ (if using TypeScript)

### Removed Features

The following deprecated features have been removed:

- `countAlphaPixel()` - Use custom pixel counting with `getPixel()`
- `paintLabels()` - Feature was removed due to dependency issues. We plan to add it back in the future updates.
- `warpingFourPoints()` - Use `getPerspectiveWarp()` + `transform()`.
- 32-bit color depth has been currently deprecated. We plan to add it back in the future updates as well.
- `CMYK` and `HSL` color models have been deprecated. We plan to add it in the future updates.

> - `insert()` has been deprecated. We plan to add it in the future updates.

Author: These two points have been discussed before. But I can't remember the reason why they were not added.

<!-- truncate -->

# API Changes

## 🔷 TypeScript Support

All APIs now have strict TypeScript definitions:

```ts
// Before: loose typing
const pixel = img.getPixel(x, y); // any[]

// After: strict typing
const pixel = img.getPixel(x, y); // number[] with proper channel count
```

This eliminates runtime type errors and provides better IntelliSense, autocomplete, and refactoring support in your IDE. Developers can now catch bugs at compile time rather than discovering them in production.

## ⚠️ Breaking changes

### Images

#### Loading and saving

`load()` and `save()` have been replaced with dedicated functions `read()` and `write()`.

```ts
//Before
import { Image } from 'image-js';
const img = await Image.load('cat.jpg');
img.save('newCat.jpg');
```

```ts
//After
import { read, write } from 'image-js';
const img2 = await read('cat.jpg');
await write('newCat.jpg', img);
```

There are also synchronous versions of these functions.

```ts
import { readSync, writeSync } from 'image-js';
const img = readSync('cat.jpg');
writeSync('newCat.jpg', img);
```

> The new approach allows for better TypeScript inference, smaller bundle sizes through tree-shaking, and clearer API design where I/O operations are separate from image manipulation.

Reviewer: Not obvious to me that the other points you made are valid.

```suggestion
Those changes separates I/O operations from image manipulation for a clearer API design.
```

#### Creating

When creating a new image, unlike before, image's width and height must be specified.

```ts
import { Image } from 'image-js';

> // Would work before, will throw an error in a new version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Would work before, will throw an error in the new version.
```

const image = new Image();
// Works fine.
const image2 = new Image(10, 10);
```

> This change makes the Image constructor more explicit by requiring you to specify the dimensions upfront, preventing potential errors from working with uninitialized or undefined-sized images

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This change makes the Image constructor more explicit by requiring you to specify the dimensions upfront, preventing potential errors from working with uninitialized or undefined-sized images.
```

#### Coordinate System Changes

Coordinates are now represented using `Point` objects instead of arrays. This change affects methods that require coordinate input like cropping, drawing, pixel manipulation etc.

```ts
// Before
const croppedImage = img.crop({
  x:10,
  y:10
  width: 10,
  height: 10,
});
// After
const croppedImage = img.crop({
  origin: { column: 10, row: 10 },
  width: 10,
  height: 10,
});
```

It is a more explicit and self-documenting code. It also eliminates confusion about array order (column vs row).

### Masks

Binary images are now handled by a dedicated `Mask` class instead of Image with `kind: 'BINARY'`.

```ts
// Before
const mask = new Image(10, 10, { kind: 'BINARY' });
```

```ts
// After
const mask = new Mask(10, 10);
```

> `Mask` provides better type safety, clearer API, and optimized performance for binary operations.

Reviewer: Are you sure about performance?

`stack.getMinImage()` ➡️ `stack.maxImage()`

`stack.getAverageImage()` ➡️ `stack.meanImage()`

**Pixel and value getters/setters**:

`img.getBitXY()` ➡️ `mask.getBit()`

`img.getBit()` ➡️ `mask.getBitByIndex()`

`img.getPixelXY()` ➡️ `img.getPixel()`

`img.getPixel()` ➡️ `img.getPixelByIndex()`

`img.getValueXY()` ➡️ `img.getValue()`

`img.getValue()` ➡️ `img.getValueByIndex()`

`img.setBitXY()` ➡️ `mask.setBit()`

`img.setBit()` ➡️ `mask.setBitByIndex()`

`img.setPixelXY()` ➡️ `img.setPixel()`

`img.setPixel()` ➡️ `img.setPixelByIndex()`

`img.setValueXY()` ➡️ `img.setValue()`

`img.setValue()` ➡️ `img.setValueByIndex()`

**Other methods**:

`img.getLocalMaxima()` ➡️ `img.getExtrema()`

`img.getChannel()` ➡️ `img.extractChannel()`

`img.rotateLeft()` & `img.rotateRight()` ➡️ `img.rotate()`

`img.flipX()` & `img.flipY()` ➡️ `img.flip()`

`img.colorDepth()` ➡️ `img.convertBitDepth()`

`img.mask()` ➡️ `img.threshold()`

`img.cannyEdge()` ➡️ `img.cannyEdgeDetector()`

`img.blurFilter()` ➡️ `img.blur()`

`img.insert()` ➡️ `img.copyTo()`

`img.convolution()` ➡️ `img.directConvolution()`

### Compatibility requirements

- Node.js: 18+ (previously 14+)

> - TypeScript: 5.2.2+ (if using TypeScript)

Reviewer: This is not a compatibility requirement.

```suggestion
```

### Removed Features

The following deprecated features have been removed:

#### Images

- `countAlphaPixel()` - Use custom pixel counting with `getPixel()`

> - `paintLabels()` and `roi.paint()` - Features have been removed due to dependency issues. We plan to add it back in the future updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `paintLabels()` and `roi.paint()` - Features have been removed due to dependency issues. We plan to add it back in future updates.
```

- `warpingFourPoints()` - Use `getPerspectiveWarp()` + `transform()`.

> - 32-bit color depth has been currently removed. We plan to add it back in the future updates as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 32-bit color depth has been currently removed. We plan to add it back in future updates as well.
```

Author: Not planning on adding 32-bit depth support in the future.

- `CMYK` and `HSL` color models have been removed.

> - `abs()` has been removed.

Author: There is no alternative here, because `abs()` is used for 32-bit depth images. Since 32-bits are not supported anymore, `abs()` will be removed along with it.

```ts
const resized = img.resize(800, 600, { interpolation: 'bicubic' });
```

**Use cases**: In many cases it gives a better quality when scaling images, especially for photographs.

### Prewitt filter

[Prewitt](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prewitt_operator) filter has been added to the `derivative()` filter.

```ts
const prewitt = img.derivative({ filter: 'prewitt' });
```

**Use cases**: Object detection, image segmentation, feature extraction. You can learn more about it [here](../docs/Features/Morphology/Morphological%20Gradient).

### Migration from deprecated methods

`warpingFourPoints()` has been removed. Now you have [`getPerspectiveWarp()`](../docs/Features/Geometry/Get%20Perspective%20Warp%20Matrix) that returns a matrix that can be applied on the image of interest in a new `transform()`.

```ts
// Before
const warped = img.warpingFourPoints(corners);

// After
const matrix = getPerspectiveWarp(corners);
const warped = img.transform(matrix);
```

**Use cases**: Rectification of a perspective angle of an image. You can learn more about it [here](../docs/Features/Geometry/Get%20Perspective%20Warp%20Matrix).

### `merge()`

> `merge()`is the opposite of `split()`. It allows combining several one-channel images into one multi-channel image:

Author: No, `merge`, when combining one-channel images creates a multi-channel image. `combineChannels()` creates a grayscale image from combining channels of initial image.

```ts
// Creates 3  grayscale images;
const img1 = new Image(2, 2, { colorModel: 'GREY', bitDepth: 8 }).fill(0);
const img2 = new Image(2, 2, { colorModel: 'GREY', bitDepth: 8 }).fill(0);
const img3 = new Image(2, 2, { colorModel: 'GREY', bitDepth: 8 }).fill(255);
// Creates RGB image. In this case, it creates blue 2x2 image.
const img4 = merge([img1, img2, img3]);
```

**Use cases**: Combination of multiple channels into one image after they were modified.

### `correctColor()`

This function performs color correction using machine learning to match an image's colors to reference standards.

```ts
const measured = [
  { r: 180, g: 120, b: 90 }, // Colors sampled from the image
  { r: 200, g: 200, b: 180 },
];
const reference = [
  { r: 255, g: 128, b: 64 }, // What those colors should actually be
  { r: 255, g: 255, b: 255 },
];
const corrected = image.correctColor(measured, reference);
```

**Use cases**: Camera calibration, white balance correction, matching images from different devices, scientific imaging standardization.

### `increaseContrast()`

This function increases image contrast by stretching the pixel value range to use the full available dynamic range.

```ts

> const highContrast = image.increaseContrast();

Author: Didn't find anything that does something similar in legacy version.

```ts
const pixelatedImage = image.pixelate({
  cellSize: 8,
});
```

**Use cases**: Creating retro 8-bit effects, reducing image detail for artistic purposes, or preparing images for low-resolution displays.

### `cropRectangle()`

While `crop()` and `cropRectangle()` might appear similar. However, they provide provide different approaches to extracting image regions.
`crop()` - Standard rectangular cropping that maintains the original image orientation:

```ts
const cropped = image.crop({
  column: 10,
  row: 10,
  width: 50,
  height: 50,
});
// Returns a piece of image with the same
// orientation as the parent image.
```

`cropRectangle()` - Advanced cropping that extracts rotated rectangular regions defined by four corner points:

```ts
const points = [
  { row: 30, column: 30 },
  { row: 60, column: 60 },
  { row: 90, column: 30 },
  { row: 60, column: 0 },
];
const rotatedCrop = image.cropRectangle(points);
// Returns a cropped oriented rectangle.
```

Use `crop()` for simple rectangular selections aligned with image axes, and `cropRectangle()` when you need to extract tilted or rotated rectangular regions.

### `drawMarkers()`

> Similarly to `drawPoints()`, `drawMarkers()` allows user to annotate an image. However,`drawMarkers()` creates visible markers (crosses, circles, squares, triangles)

Author: Yes, there was actually. The function `paintPoints()` also allowed painting markers. Now previous functionality is split into `drawPoints()` for drawing points and `drawMarkers()` for drawing markers.

> Similarly to `drawPoints()`, `drawMarkers()` allows user to annotate an image. However,`drawMarkers()` creates visible markers (crosses, circles, squares, triangles)

Author: It's actually the other way around. `paintPoints()` has become `drawMarkers()` and `drawPoints()` is a new feature.
